Now that a ripple effect in the body of physics has indeed been identified.
Let's take a closer look at those ripples and try to better understand what kind of theoretical implications
they actually have now.
In our last video, we found that momentum, for the most part, seemed to follow the conventions we
have from classical physics, namely that it is conserved between two states.
However, what we found is that weird, odd relativistic effects tend to crop up close to high speeds
close to the speed of light.
In particular, what we found is that as we approach the speed of light, the inertial inertia of an
object or body, or any kind of system tends to increase in a sense that it tends to resist any kind
of force that tries to accelerate to a higher velocity.
So the net effect is that if you're trying to accelerate an object closer to the speed of light, it
gets harder and harder and harder as we approach that cap.
OK, now if we think about this from an energy standpoint, it becomes very interesting, right?
Logically, we can assert that if it's harder and harder to apply, force and accelerate to a higher
velocity, that seems to insinuate that as we get closer and closer to the speed of light, we would
need more and more and more energy to get an additional velocity into that particle into that system
that we're analyzing.
So naturally, we could assume that just like momentum, perhaps some kind of relativistic effect could
come into play, crop up in reality and start to appear close to the speed of light.
So what we're going to do in this video is we're going to follow along what we did with classical mechanics,
back with Newtonian mechanics.
What do we do after we derived expressions for momentum?
What we did is we use that to derive expressions for force.
And then that was used to do to derive notions and concepts of energy and in particular, what we hope
would hold in special relativity conservation of energy.
Right.
We're going to investigate energy.
We're going to see if our intuition, which feels like there's some kind of weird effect that would
crop up close to the speed of light, whether that's true or not.
And the way in which we're going to do this again, we're going to follow the same conventions now back
in classical physics and Newtonian mechanics.
What we did is we made use of something known as the work energy principle, which in essence states
that any force you apply to an object that's going to result in a change of kinetic energy.
In other words, if you push an object that's going to create kinetic energy, you're putting energy
into the system, and that energy allows us to move at a higher velocity, right?
Recall the work energy principle, right?
In words where I just explain this theory that any work W done by all forces acting on a particle is
equivalent to the change in the particles kinetic energy.
OK?
So if we use this, this really provides us with the recipe and ingredients that are required for baking
a new relativistic energy equation.
And that's what we're going to tackle right now.
So the first thing we want to do.
We got the ingredients.
We got this new relativistic momentum.
We have a recipe, a structure that we use in classical physics.
Let's take those ingredients and start throwing them into our recipe and see what is ulit from cooking
up this new formula.
So the first thing we find is that as we do in classical physics, our force is equal to the derivative
of the momentum.
OK?
That's what we use to figure out the force.
Right.
It forces a change in momentum.
It's a change in the motion of a particle.
We're going to apply the same ideas here to see what happens using our new special relativity ideas.
So what we could do is we could take what we derived in the previous video from an atom, which is momentum
is equal to this gamma.
In terms of the velocity of the object, the particle, the system are analyzing times, the rest mass
of that object, Typekit velocity of it.
So if we take this and recall, that became a factor which is responsible for, I guess, introducing
all these relativistic effects and to find out such we can take this and throw it straight through the
work energy principle.
So as I said, any kind of work done on the system is due to the force trying to move it.
It's the force over the distance that object moves.
F. Scott, D. Yes, this is the distance of what you mutes.
So that work that you put into the system allows to speed up and that results in a change in its kinetic
energy.
OK, so we're going to use this as the recipe.
We got the ingredients we started putting those ingredients in.
Let's charge forward in this recipe and cooking up this nice new formula, OK?
So using this guy, what we could do is say the change of kinetic energy is just.
This we take f we plug that guy in here, we have the same exact result.
The derivative of gamma, every with respect to time right there and that is dot it into this.
Yes.
Now if we're assuming a constant velocity, no kind of change, no external force being applied aside
from this guy here, what we know is that a change in distance, it's just the right fit one 180.
We plug that guy in and we end up with this weird formula here.
And what we're going to do is we're going to assume that initially this object was at rest.
We're trying to put energy into the system.
So it goes from rest to some velocity, right?
So after a time, t, it has velocity.
So we're going to integrate from zero to T from state one to state two.
OK.
So using this, how do we make progress?
How can we make additional progress?
What we can do is we can make a note of what we had previously in the last video on momentum that mass,
we're going to use an invariant mass.
It's not a to change.
We're not going to assume there's a variable mass because that introduces a lot of problems.
We're not even going to go into that.
We're going to see in that there's a rest mass, right?
The mass we measure when an object at rest and that is constant.
So what we could do is we could pull this mass out of the derivative, out of the integral and it becomes
as such.
The other thing we're going to make use of is the dot product, right, the DOT product.
We have this vector here in that vector right there.
This is the differential doesn't matter.
It still behaves in the same fashion.
So we have V2V and the angle between those vectors is zero.
What's going to happen is you just get the magnitude of the time, the magnitude of V and, you know,
cosine of the angle between the cosine 0s one.
So DV dot v.
Well, you know what?
That's just the magnitudes a v and V.
So what we end up with is we're going to pull the mass out and we just get the magnitude of the I'm
going to start dealing with vectors henceforth.
So that's, you know, energy is not a vector.
So that drives well for intuition.
And we get the phone, we get the magnitude of velocity times.
This weird differential of gamma times, the magnitude of velocity and we make a change of the differential.
We have to switch from time to this new differential, Crosby.
So we're going to go from zero to final velocity times Ghana.
Now at this point, you're thinking, Whoa, OK.
So we put all these ingredients into this recipe that didn't really bake a nice relativistic energy
equation for us.
So what we need to do is we need a marinade in a bit.
We need to put some seasoning in there.
So it's more appetizing and it gives us some kind of form that's more appealing to us.
So what we're going to do is we're going to take this guy here, which we have no idea what in the world
is to try and communicate.
What we're going to do is we're going to use our favorite tool in all physics, right?
One of my professors has asserted that integration by parts which you studied in calc two, most likely
is probably one of the most useful tools in all physics because it allows us to make a lot of progress
in deriving very important results.
So we're going to make use of this here.
And if you recall what this data states that if we have an integral of some quantum you'd've that is
equal to you tied to be defined from states one or two minus the integral of the EU, another way of
thinking about this is literally just taking the derivative of this guy right here you would get you'd've
plus BTU.
It's just a rearrangement of that idea.
So if we take this, we can make headway on this guy and convert it into a form which we could actually
evaluate it using our calc one on one talks.
So what we're going to do is we're going to say this v here.
It's going to be the U.
Down here, as you can see in green and the Delta Gamma V, this guy is going to be the DV as designated
in blue here.
So if we take that, we can start getting a very interesting form of equation here.
So I'm going to work it out with you just because it involves a lot of math and a lot of textbooks actually,
unfortunately just says, Oh, they say, Oh, it can be shown that do this.
I don't like that.
I want to be your ally in learning this, so we're going to work through it together.
So Delta K e when we apply, this guy here are term.
It's going to pop out and we see we have a U.
V right here, defined from one to two.
OK.
So we have you here.
V is just going to be what is inside the differential here.
So we get a delta, not a delta.
Again, sorry about that.
We get a gamma b plus another B.
Actually, I'm going to keep the M here just because it's going to look.
It's going to look nice.
So we get this guy times.
AMA.
And B squared.
And you're probably thinking what happened to this?
This going from state to state to in essence what we did, we just we literally plugged it in.
So you plug in Gamma B and then zero at state one that literally cancels so we don't get any kind of
results.
So it just disappears from that.
And in next what we get, we need to subtract this integral here.
So I'm to bring the M.
It comes along for the ride and then we have this integral and then we have the U.
Well, this is just Gamma V..
OK, so that's gamma.
I'm just going to leave it as gamma, so we get gamma the and then deal is Steve.
And what we're going to do if we go from zero to, I don't know why I keep saying Delta as a gamma gamma
v.
We're going to f with zero two V.
If we change the differential, that's just to be there.
And we see here now we have a form which we could potentially integrate.
So we made some progress in a range of my parts is awesome and allows you to do that most of the time.
So we get this guy here and we know that this is a function of velocity.
So we can't just leave it as a gamma anymore.
What we're going to do is we're going to really throw in the exact value right there.
So we get a B.
And again, I'm going to drop all the vector notation because we're just dealing with scholars here.
We're going to be divided by the square root of one minus V or C.
Squared and when we see that, we say, Oh, that looks like something I solved and talk one on one
before.
I can make headway.
I can work with this, I can solve it.
So we're going to do is we're going to solve this guy here by making a simple use of substitution,
which you've probably done in calculus before a lot of individuals who are running through this, they
say, Oh, we're just going to get some kind of integral from a table.
Now we're going to do it, we're going to do the math right.
You learn physics by doing physics.
So we're going to do it, OK?
So what we get is we're going to say and maybe you can pick up the use of yourself.
We're going to let G.
So we don't get confused.
I don't like having a you.
It's too close to a V.
We're going to say G is going to equal negative v over C quantity squared.
OK.
So when we make this substitution, we need to solve this in four days.
We need to differentiate this first in terms of B, so what we're going to do is we're going to dig
deep.
Take the derivative and we end up with.
The first derivative, we get this quantity squared.
This is a constant it pops out, so we get negative to be.
Over C squared that comes along for the ride and then change, which we would get like a DVD something
else, but we're doing it in terms of fee.
So we're pushing it so we don't have to apply that.
So what happens is we get this guy and we want to isolate a fee and a DVD so we can actually integrate
this right?
So we're in good shape.
We got confidence here.
We can multiply by negative c squared.
Over two.
Times.
And that is equal to the DV.
So what I want to do is I want to put your attention to two parameters.
We got this guy.
Right here.
And we have the same term right in there, so we can literally plug this in substitute g there and we'll
get a form of the integral that we can actually solve.
OK.
So what happens is.
We get the following we find that this integral.
From zero 02 v v over Route one minus v over C quantity squared, DV is no different than an integral.
Of the quantity.
One man is VRC squared or one plus G.
That quantity to the negative one half.
And we got two slots of two in a value for this guy, which we found here.
So this gets multiplied by.
A negative C squared.
Over two.
DG.
And when we see this.
It's something that you've probably solved many times before.
This is an easy, easy guide to solve.
So let's actually do that, but before we do it, we need to go from TV to the IG.
So if we're going from zero to be, we're going from plus zero in here.
We're going from zero to negative yursik squared.
OK, so we're going to use that guy at the limit of the integration.
And let's solve this, well, if we have 1+ due to the baby one half, what you do is you literally
add one to the exponent and you get one plus year.
So the one half and then you invert that exponent, so we're going to have to multiply by two.
So count for the funeral.
And then we multiply by this concern right here, it comes along for the ride, this negative C squared
over two.
And then we would have to evaluate from zero.
To the oversea quantities square, and we have a little negative right out front right there.
OK, so what we do is we find these twos cancel.
And this just becomes no different than let's plug this guy in David C squared.
And.
It's the square root.
One plus the.
Over C squared, I made a sign of steak that's actually a negative.
And then we subtract when we plug in a zero four g, which would give us literally a C squared, so
we add a C square or wait a minute, let's back up a bit.
So that negative sign, we're subtracting a negative sign that becomes a positive.
So we get that guy.
So Rick, anyway, we went through the exercise of evaluating this integral.
We got a result.
I didn't cop out on you guys.
I solved it with you.
I held your hand.
We're good to go.
So what we could do is we plug this guy straight into that integral there.
And what we end up with is gamma.
M the squared.
Minus M times the quantity.
Negative C squared routes, one minus the over C squared plus C squared.
And close off that bracket, so we're making headway, we're making headway.
What we find is we get this weird expression, and at first it sort of seems like what in the world
happened to our energy?
This is sort of foreign to us.
Let's make headway.
Let's keep working on this recipe.
Let's keep baking the equation.
So this is equal to gamma M.V. squared plus and c squared is square root one minus B or C quantity squared.
Minus and c squared.
So you see us and see square popping up, and that might make you think of that famous equation that
Einstein came up with, which is good.
So seems like we're converging upon what Einstein did.
Let's see what we can do.
What we want to do is what a group terms.
But it's not in a form that looks very appealing.
OK, so what I'm going to do is I'm going to plug this guy in.
Basically, this.
Divide by the square root of one minus v be overseen, and I'm gonna try and make these guys have a
common denominator such that we can apply the numerator.
OK?
And as you probably would guess, you probably would guess a gamma is also going to pop out, as has
happened with previous results.
So what we do is we want to get this guy having the same form.
What we could do is we can get this and we can say this times one, we're multiply by one this same
term.
Such and I had a negative M.S. squared with a very ugly end there.
What we do is.
We see that this becomes literally I'll write it, I'll spell it out for you guys, so this just becomes
m v squared.
Plus.
And C squared times this times that one half plus one half gives you a one in the exponent one minus
B or C quantity squared.
Divided by this guy, so we got our gamma factor out in front, that's looking good.
And then the NSC squared comes along for the ride.
So what we can see is that we get an empty square here minus and c squared about a square o minus empty
square.
Oh, look at that bam.
And then this term cancels out with that.
So what are we left with?
So if we erased this guy here?
And we finish.
If belabored exercise, what we get is that the change in kinetic energy is equal to again, this guy
and b squared.
Minus C squared cancels here we get minus envy squared plus C squared.
So we get in and C squared over the square root of one minus B or C, that's our beautiful gamma factor.
So we see relativistic effects cropping up minus M.C. squared.
Ooh, that's looking a bit nicer than previously, and we can make this super fly by pulling out the
C squared, noting that this is a gamma, so I'll work through it for you.
So we don't get confused is again as c squared minus M.C. squared, which is no different than gamma
minus one.
M c squared.
Oh, that looks interesting, so.
We look at this result here, and we find that our intuition was indeed correct.
It's the inertia or the resistance to speeding up increases as we approach the speed of light.
Then our intuition that that would require more and more energy, greater amounts of energy for every
single unit of velocity that is gained closer to the speed of light that would require more energy.
And we see here that that possibly may be cropping up.
Right.
So what we're going to do next is we're going to try to reduce this guy here down to the classical result
and see if that can give us any kind of information regarding the kinetic energy regarding relativistic
effects close to the speed of light.
Let's do that next.